# 1. Mummy of Hornedjitef

About 240 BC  
Excavated from Asasif, Thebes, Egypt


## Before listening

What is enmity?

What is Bloomsbury?

What is economics?

What is famine?

Is it possible that a famine could be caused by anything other than a region simply not having enough food? Find out what the Indian economist Amartya Sen had to say about the Bengal famine of 1943.

Where is Karnak?

What is bitumen?

What is arthritis?

What is colonialism? 

(bonus) What was the Norman conquest of England? When did it happen? Who
were Harold II and William the Conqueror?


## Listen

[Listen to this program online:
"Mummy of Hornedjitef"](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/objects/sogITE3FSKStlk12qd2W3w)
([transcript](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/about/transcripts/episode1/))

![Image of the inner mummy case](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4e/Hornedjitef_mummy_british_museum.JPG/179px-Hornedjitef_mummy_british_museum.JPG)


## Discussion

Before hearing this episode, I had thought only Egyptian pharaohs were
mummified. But Hornedjitef was not a pharaoh. Look up Egyptian burial
practices. Who in Egyptian society was mummified?

The program talks about whether objects should be exhibited in the
countries where they were made. The Egyptian writer Ahdaf Soueif said
that it is not so bad to have Egyptian artifacts on display all over the
world. What are the possible counterarguments? When was the mummy of
Hornedjitef excavated? Who ruled Egypt at the time?

Why was this object selected for the first program in the series?
(Hints: The program gives two reasons. One is personal. The other has to
do with information and what sort of work goes on at the British
Museum.)


## Links

[EA6678: Base and lid of the anthropoid wooden inner coffin of Hornedjitef](http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=128988&partId=1)

[EA6677: Base and lid of the anthropoid outer coffin of Hornedjitef](http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=124406&partId=1)

[EA6679: Mummy of a man, aged 55-65, in a gilded and painted cartonnage mummy-case and separate mask, bearing the name Hornedjitef](http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=117326&partId=1)

[Ahdaf Soueif (Wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ahdaf_Soueif)

[Ahdaf Soueif's writing in the *Guardian*](http://www.theguardian.com/profile/ahdafsoueif)


## Rationale

The "bonus" pre-work question about the Battle of Hastings prepares the
student to get one throwaway joke in the program. Take it or leave it!

A definition of the word *economics* cannot convey to a student what the
subject matter of economics is really like. The questions about famine
and Amartya Sen are meant to help illustrate economics (not Sen's work)
by example. [This video is a better 5-minute introduction to
Amartya Sen.](http://www.mruniversity.com/courses/development-economics/amartya-sen-1-0)

The program promotes a view of history as a "joint effort". I decided
not to put in a discussion question about this, for now. I think that
part of the program serves mainly to convey the show's aspirations. No
compelling logical argument is presented here in the first episode, but
the theme is, as promised, revisited later in the series.

(Alternatively, the "joint effort" stuff in this episode might be an
argument for world history, which is rather new, emerging as an academic
field only in the 1980s. But that's a stretch. Or it could be seen as
mainly about contemporary politics, and not so much history at all. For
example, Amartya Sen mentions the "clash of civilizations" hypothesis,
which I decided not to put into the pre-work. It seemed like a huge
distraction.)
