# 5. Clovis Spear Point

Stone  
13,000 years ago  
found in Arizona, US


## Before Listening

(timeline) To keep things straight, let's start a timeline of human
history. Here are some things you may want to put on it:

*   the oldest human artifacts ever discovered

*   the four artifacts covered in the series so far (Note that many of
    these individual objects have dates on them, but they really fall
    into a broad range of time in which such things were made: the
    Egyptians made mummies for thousands of years.)

*   the Last Glacial Maximum (marking the turning point of the most
    recent Ice Age)

*   the first human migration out of Africa

We'll keep adding things to our timeline as we go. At some point you'll
find that the right-hand side of your timeline is getting too crowded.
You can then pull out a fresh sheet of paper and start a new timeline,
on a different scale, showing only the most recent events, as if you're
"zooming in" on the most recent era.


## Listen

[Clovis spear point](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/objects/hLAME-wiTyaZU2KQf-P5vA)

![Image of a Clovis spear point](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/34/Clovis_spear_point.jpg/375px-Clovis_spear_point.jpg)


## Discussion

How big is the spear point? What is it made of?

"The shaft, of course, is long gone." Why "of course"? (research) What
are the oldest wooden artifacts that modern people have ever found, and
what had to happen in order to preserve them?

In this program, Gary Haynes explains why we think Clovis people were
probably the earliest people to arrive in North America. What's the
evidence?

(research) Find a map of where Clovis people lived.

How did people get to America? When did it happen?

The program says that you don't have to strike an animal's vital organs
with a spear in order to kill it. Why not? How does the spear kill?

(research) Around 11,000 to 10,000 years ago, most of the large mammal
species in the Americas went extinct. What were these species? Does the
program say what caused their extinction? Is there another possibility?
(Hint: What other large-scale natural event happened at the same time?)
Did any large American mammal species survive?

The program says that around 7500 BC, the Americas were cut off from the
rest of the world, until the arrival of the Europeans, nine thousand
years later. But setting aside Leif Erikson, there's evidence for
several later migrations from eastern Asia to the Americas. How could
this have happened, and how do you think we know about them?

The program says that bits of rubbish "are as much a defining
characteristic of being human as great art". Do you agree? Is this true
of our garbage today? Imagine you are an archaeologist ten thousand
years in the future, trying to piece together the lives of humans in the
early 2000s AD, and you came upon our garbage bin, miraculously sealed,
with minimal decomposition. What would you find? What would you learn
about us?

The program closes on a hopeful note. Are you convinced these artifacts
reveal a desire to make things better?

(timeline) Add these events to your timeline:

*   Humans have filled Africa, Europe, Asia, and crossed the seas to
    Australia. (40,000 years ago)

*   The first migration of humans into the Americas

*   Except for the Pacific islands, humans populate the whole
    habitable world.

Does it seem to you that the pace of events is accelerating?


## Links

[1962,1206.137: Clovis point](http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=3175535&partId=1)

[Clovis culture (Wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clovis_culture).

[Settlement of the Americas
(Wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement_of_the_Americas).
"While there is general agreement that the Americas were first settled
from Asia, the pattern of migration, its timing, and the place(s) of
origin in Asia of the peoples who migrated to the Americas remain
unclear."

[Quaternary extinction
event](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quaternary_extinction_event).

Professor Gary Haynes is retired now. He wrote a book,
*[The Early Settlement of North America: The Clovis
Era](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1285991.The_Early_Settlement_of_North_America)*.

The program introduces [Michael Palin](http://www.themichaelpalin.com/)
as a broadcaster and traveler, perhaps in honor of his BBC travel
series, [*Around the World in 80
Days*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Palin:_Around_the_World_in_80_Days).
But he is best known as a member of the comedy group [Monty
Python](http://www.montypython.com/).


## Rationale

The program raises interesting points about Native American religion,
which points at general questions about fundamentalism vs. science, and
power and cultural repression. I couldn't find a good hook for
discussion but I hope I will sometime.

Regarding the mass extinction of large mammals, what I really want to
ask is, how on earth did the American bison survive? But I don't know
the answer!
