# 7. Ain Sakhri lovers figurine
Stone  
About 11,000 years ago  
Found near Bethlehem

*Note: This episode is about a sculpture of two people having sex. The
program mentions genitals and even (in the vaguest possible way) the
conventions of pornographic film, but there's nothing explicit.*


## Before listening

What is a Bedouin?

What is a prude? What does *prudish* mean?

What does "in the realm of historical speculation" mean?

What is domestication?

Where is Bethlehem?

Where is the Dead Sea?

What is a staple crop?

What does *sedentary* mean?


## Listen

[Listen to this program online:
"Ain Sakhri lovers figurine"](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/objects/vNEwNR8rSzGPSwSn3yeJwA)
([transcript](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/about/transcripts/episode7/))

![Image of the Ain Sakhri lovers.](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Lovers_9000BC_british_museum.jpg/318px-Lovers_9000BC_british_museum.jpg)


## Discussion

Do you agree that things found in a dwelling "must" play "some kind of
role in domestic, everyday life"?

The program mentions "wheat and barley" as "the world's great staple
crops". Were there others? What are the world's staple crops today?

Niel MacGregor says: "I think it's one of the tenderest expressions of
love that I know, comparable to the great kissing couples of Brancusi
and Rodin[.]" Find pictures of
[Rodin's](http://www.musee-rodin.fr/en/collections/sculptures/kiss) and
[Brancusi's](http://www.philamuseum.org/collections/permanent/51306.html)
sculptures, both called *The Kiss*. What do you think?

(research) "A guaranteed abundant food source fuelled a sustained
population explosion, and people began to live in large villages of
between two or three hundred - the highest concentration of people the
world had yet seen." What might the evidence be of a population
explosion?  Look up [historical population
estimates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_population_estimates).
When did this "sustained population explosion" end?

(research) In this program, Ian Hodder says that, around the time of
this figurine, he sees a "general shift towards [...] being more
concerned with human relationships rather than on the relationships
between humans and wild animals, and on the relationships between wild
animals themselves." Find examples of art older than this figurine. Do
you find evidence for this statement?


## Links

[1958,1007.1: figurine](http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=1358965&partId=1)

[Ain Sakhri lovers (Wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ain_Sakhri_lovers).

[The Natufian people](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natufian_culture)
harvested wild cereals and hunted gazelles, but they were a settled
people. The Wikipedia page describes Natufian "round houses" and shows a
picture of "the remains of a wall of a Natufian house"—some of the
world's first buildings.

[Ian Hodder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ian_Hodder), British
archaeologist.

[Abbé Breuil](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henri_Breuil), French
archaeologist and geologist, 1877-1961.

[Marc Quinn](http://marcquinn.com/), contemporary British sculptor. His
works include a frozen sculpture of his head, made of his own blood
("[There were rumors that the piece had
melted](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marc_Quinn#.22Self.22_.28ongoing_project.29),
but Saatchi dispelled those rumors when he exhibited it at his new
gallery in London in 2003."); a series of sculptures in marble of people
born with limbs missing; flower paintings executed in reverse color.
