# 8. Egyptian Clay Cattle

5,500 years ago  
Painted clay  
Found at El Amra, Southern Egypt


## Before listening

Who was Bat?

What are rushes?

What does *modern* mean?

What is an insurance policy?

What does *clerical* mean?

Who is Indiana Jones?


## Listen

[Listen to this program online:
"Egyptian clay model of cattle"](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/objects/ba9VK4iRQUybd1KMGnRimQ)
([transcript](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/about/transcripts/episode8/))

![Image of the clay cattle](http://www.britishmuseum.org/collectionimages/AN00410/AN00410037_001_l.jpg)


## Discussion

This program describes a dramatic change in climate across northern
Africa. What happened? How did it lead to the domestication of cattle in
Egypt?

What is the archaeological evidence that the Egyptians had domesticated
cattle? (Hint: Fekri Hassan talked about evidence that he found
excavating early Egyptian farming villages.)

What did the early Egyptians keep cattle for? Why do we think they
weren't raised for meat or milk?

Why did humans "home in on a small number of target species" around ten
thousand years ago? (If your answer is that agriculture forces people to
focus on a small number of species, this doesn't entirely answer the
question. Why were so few species domesticated?)

The program says that the native African cattle have become extinct. How
do you think this happened?

In the last show, Niel MacGregor said that the Ain Sakhri lovers
figurine must have had a role in everyday life, since it was found in a
dwelling, not a grave. In this show, he says, "Cow models like this one
are quite common [in graves], so we can be fairly sure that cows must
have played a significant part in Egyptian daily life - such an
important part, in fact, that they couldn't be left behind[...]." Do you
think this is a contradiction, or are both conclusions reasonable?


## Links

[EA35506 - model / figurine](http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=125590&partId=1)

[Wikimedia: Bovines in Ancient Egypt](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Bovines_in_Ancient_Egypt),
several dozen pictures of ancient Egyptian artwork portraying cows. Note
that the word "ancient" covers a vast period of time in Egypt! Some of
the pieces in this collection are no more than 3,200 years old.

Wikipedia has an excellent article on
[blood as food](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood_as_food).

[Fekri Hassan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fekri_Hassan),
geoarchaeologist.

[Martin Jones](http://www.arch.cam.ac.uk/directory/mkj12), archaeologist
at the University of Cambridge.

A fanstastic article, drawing on Jared Diamond's *Guns, Germs, and
Steel*, answers the question:
[Why can't all animals be domesticated?](http://www.livescience.com/33870-domesticated-animals-criteria.html)


## Rationale

The actual meaning of *modern* is tricky. In theory, it just means
"current", but in particular fields, like art or archaeology, whenever
the word becomes widely used, its meaning tends to get attached to that
time period. In literature, Modernism had run its course by
about 1940. I'm not sure what "early modern humans" means as Martin
Jones uses the phrase in this program. I would believe anything from
200,000 to 10,000 years ago.

I don't know why the native African cattle went extinct, but it's worth
pointing out that domestication is an evolutionary niche. Domesticated
species tend to have great reproductive success, and they are unlikely
to fall victim to some common causes of extinction: hunting, predation,
loss of habitat. The down side, of course, is that these species are
completely dependent on humans for their survival. Wikipedia says,
"During the New Kingdom the Zebu, hump-backed cattle from Syria were
introduced to Egypt and the earlier form seems to have slowly been
replaced by these new cattle." The original Egyptian cattle may have
become extinct by human preference.
