# 9. Maya maize god statue

Stone  
715 AD  
Honduras


## Before listening

Where is Chiapas, Mexico?

Where is Cop√°n? Where is Honduras?

Who is Ceres?

Who is Annapurna?

When and where did the Maya civilization live?

What was the Popol Vuh? What does it have to say about the earliest people?

What does it mean to say that a food is *stodgy*?

What are foodies?


## Listen

[Listen to this program online:
"Maya maize god statue"](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/objects/Hvi54RDiQym6Pgd3_IsRKA)
([transcript](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/about/transcripts/episode9/))

![Image of the statue](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/30/Maya_maize_god_statue.jpg/270px-Maya_maize_god_statue.jpg)


## Discussion

The program says that as people developed staple crops, 5,000 to 10,000
years ago, "everywhere stories about gods emerged". How do we know about
these stories? (research) Did the Maya leave behind any writing? Why do
we think this statue depicts a god?

Why was maize so important to the Maya? Why didn't they eat wheat?

The program says that nine thousand years ago, raw maize was inedible:
it had to be boiled in lime. Modern corn still has to be cooked, but not
in lime. What changed?

The program ends with the observation that "genetic modification of
crops still causes deep unease, as much religious as scientific - a
sense that the natural order is being disturbed, that humans are
trespassing on territory that's properly reserved for the gods." What do
you think?

(research) Corn and beans are traditionally eaten together. Is there a
nutritional reason for this?

(research) What are the major crops in the United States today? Which is
the biggest, in terms of tons produced each year?

(research) Back in program #6, Niel MacGregor said: "What I find
interesting about these vegetables is not just that they come originally
from all over the world, but that none of them would exist in the form
they do today if the plants they come from hadn't been carefully chosen,
cherished and modified in a long process that began about ten thousand
years ago with some intrepid and ingenious Ice Age cooks." In today's
program, we learn that maize is derived from an older plant species,
teosinte. Find pictures of teosinte and maize. How much has it been
modified? Is there a visible difference?


## Links

[Am1923,Maud.8 - sculpture](http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=3088376&partId=1&searchText=maize+god&matcult=220131&page=1)

[John Staller](http://brit.academia.edu/JohnEStaller), anthropologist

[Golden rice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_rice) is a variety of
rice genetically engineered to produce vitamin A. The idea was that this
could replace white rice in regions where people don't get enough
vitamin A in their regular diet. It's controversial, though.
