# 11. King Den's sandal label

Hippopotamus ivory  
Around 3,000 BC  
Found in Abydos, Egypt


## Before Listening

What is a political cartoon?

(research) (timeline) What is Hammurabi's code? Mark it in your
timeline. Are there any older codes of this kind? How far back does the
practice go?

What is ivory?

What is a commander-in-chief?

What is propaganda?

What is rhetoric?

What does *coerce* mean?

What does *consolidate* mean?


## Listen

[Listen to this program online:
"King Den's sandal label"](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/objects/li6X6vc1SMSJfJ2BhOdB0A)
([transcript](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/about/transcripts/episode11/))

[![Image of King Den's sandal label](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a3/IvoryLabelOfDen-BritishMuseum-August19-08.jpg/286px-IvoryLabelOfDen-BritishMuseum-August19-08.jpg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:IvoryLabelOfDen-BritishMuseum-August19-08.jpg)


## Discussion

"So how do you lead and control a city or a state where most people
don't know each other, and you can only personally persuade a very small
percentage of the inhabitants?" The program doesn't explain why a city
needs to be led and controlled. What do you think?

"And the king and his advisers are looking for ways to reinforce Egypt's
sense of its own nationhood, and support for their regime." If the king
is so powerful, and in total control of all of Egypt, why do they care
what Egyptians think or what they support?

How are cities led and controlled now?

The program says that the label was meant "to show that Den was the only
man who could guarantee what Egyptians, like everybody else, wanted from
their rulers - law and order". Do you think Egypt actually had laws at
this time? Is this what you want from your rulers?


## Links

[EA55586: label](http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=109824&partId=1)

[Toby Wilkinson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toby_Wilkinson)
is the author of
[*The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt*](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/8536070-the-rise-and-fall-of-ancient-egypt).

[Steve Bell](http://belltoons.co.uk/hotoffpress) is an English political
cartoonist. English political cartoons are weirder than American ones.

[King Den](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Den_(pharaoh)) was the sixth
pharaoh of the First Dynasty of Egypt.


## Rationale

Obviously there is more to discuss. It is a potentially uncomfortable
subject, though.

I was tempted to inject a long series of pointed questions about the
idea that most people only put a few hundred numbers in their cell
phones, and then mumble mumble something about the evolution of the
human brain. Thought the better of it!
